.\" Manpage for rsurl.
.\" This page summarizes the most-used options; `rsurl --help` always lists the
.\" complete, authoritative set for the installed build.
.TH RSURL 1 "2026-06-04" "rsurl 0.0.4" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rsurl \- transfer a URL (a pure\-Rust curl)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rsurl
[\fIoptions\fR]
\fIurl\fR...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rsurl
transfers data to or from a server using one of many supported protocols. It
is a pure\-Rust reimplementation of much of
.BR curl (1):
no C toolchain and no
.I *-sys
crates are used, so there is no OpenSSL, GSSAPI/Kerberos, or c\-ares
dependency. The command line, semantics, and exit codes follow curl unless
noted otherwise.
.PP
Supported URL schemes:
.BR http ", " https ", " ftp ", " ftps ", " sftp ", " scp ", "
.BR imap ", " imaps ", " pop3 ", " pop3s ", " smtp ", " smtps ", "
.BR mqtt ", " mqtts ", " rtsp ", " tftp ", " ldap ", " ldaps ", "
.BR telnet ", " gopher ", " gophers ", " dict ", " file ", " ws ", and " wss .
HTTP runs over HTTP/1.1, HTTP/2, or HTTP/3 (QUIC).
.SH OPTIONS
.SS General
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print the full option list and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Write a protocol trace to standard error.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-silent
Silent mode: suppress progress and error messages.
.TP
.BR \-S ", " \-\-show\-error
Show errors even when \fB\-s\fR is set.
.TP
.BR \-\-next ", " \-:
Begin a new request with its own independent options.
.TP
.BI \-K " file" "\fR, \fB\-\-config " file
Read further options from a curl\-style config file.
.SS HTTP request
.TP
.BI \-X " method" "\fR, \fB\-\-request " method
Set the request method.
.TP
.BI \-H " header" "\fR, \fB\-\-header " header
Add a request header (repeatable).
.TP
.BI \-A " ua" "\fR, \fB\-\-user\-agent " ua
Set the \fIUser\-Agent\fR header.
.TP
.BI \-e " url" "\fR, \fB\-\-referer " url
Set the \fIReferer\fR header; \fB\-e ';auto'\fR sends it on each redirect.
.TP
.BI \-d " data" "\fR, \fB\-\-data " data
Send \fIdata\fR as a urlencoded POST body; \fB@\fIfile\fR reads from disk.
See also \fB\-\-data\-raw\fR, \fB\-\-data\-binary\fR, \fB\-\-data\-urlencode\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-json " data"
POST \fIdata\fR as \fIapplication/json\fR and request a JSON response.
.TP
.BI \-F " name=value" "\fR, \fB\-\-form " name=value
Add a multipart/form\-data part (\fB@\fIfile\fR uploads, \fB<\fIfile\fR inlines).
.TP
.BI \-G ", " \-\-get
Move \fB\-d\fR data into the URL query and use GET.
.TP
.BR \-I ", " \-\-head
Fetch headers only (HEAD).
.TP
.BR \-L ", " \-\-location
Follow 3xx redirects. \fB\-\-location\-trusted\fR keeps credentials across hosts.
.TP
.BI \-b " data" "\fR, \fB\-\-cookie " data
Send cookies (a \fIname=value\fR string or a file to read).
.TP
.BI \-c " file" "\fR, \fB\-\-cookie\-jar " file
Write the cookie jar to \fIfile\fR after the transfer.
.TP
.BR \-\-compressed
Request and transparently decode a compressed response.
.SS Authentication
.TP
.BI \-u " user:password" "\fR, \fB\-\-user " user:password
Server credentials (Basic by default).
.TP
.BR \-\-digest
Use HTTP Digest authentication.
.TP
.BI \-\-oauth2\-bearer " token"
Send an OAuth 2 bearer token.
.TP
.BI \-\-aws\-sigv4 " provider"
Sign the request with AWS Signature V4 (use \fB\-u \fIkey:secret\fR).
.TP
.BI \-n ", " \-\-netrc
Read credentials from \fI~/.netrc\fR (or \fB\-\-netrc\-file\fR).
.SS TLS
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-insecure
Do not verify the server certificate.
.TP
.BI \-\-cacert " file"
Use \fIfile\fR as the CA certificate bundle.
.TP
.BR \-\-tlsv1.2 ", " \-\-tlsv1.3 ", " \-\-tls\-max " <ver>"
Pin the minimum / maximum TLS version.
.SS Transfer and output
.TP
.BI \-o " file" "\fR, \fB\-\-output " file
Write output to \fIfile\fR instead of standard output.
.TP
.BR \-O ", " \-\-remote\-name
Save to a file named like the remote resource.
.TP
.BR \-\-create\-dirs
Create missing directories for \fB\-o\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-output\-dir " <dir>"
Prepend \fIdir\fR to \fB\-o\fR/\fB\-O\fR names.
.TP
.BR \-\-remove\-on\-error
Delete a partial \fB\-o\fR/\fB\-O\fR file if the transfer fails.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-clobber
Never overwrite an existing \fB\-o\fR/\fB\-O\fR file; pick \fI.1\fR, \fI.2\fR, ...
.TP
.BI \-r " range" "\fR, \fB\-\-range " range
Request a byte range.
.TP
.BI \-\-limit\-rate " speed"
Cap the download rate (e.g. \fI200k\fR, \fI1M\fR) on file downloads.
.TP
.BI \-Y " bps" "\fR, \fB\-\-speed\-limit " bps "\fR / \fB\-y " s "\fR, \fB\-\-speed\-time " s
Abort a file download averaging below \fIbps\fR bytes/sec over \fIs\fR seconds
(exit 28).
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-filesize " bytes"
Refuse a download larger than \fIbytes\fR.
.TP
.BR \-# ", " \-\-progress\-bar
Show progress on streamed file downloads.
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-remote\-time
Set the saved file's mtime from the response.
.TP
.BI \-w " format" "\fR, \fB\-\-write\-out " format
After the transfer, print \fIformat\fR with \fB%{\fIvar\fB}\fR expanded:
\fIhttp_code\fR, \fIsize_download\fR, \fIcontent_type\fR, \fIurl_effective\fR,
\fItime_total\fR, \fItime_connect\fR, \fItime_appconnect\fR,
\fItime_pretransfer\fR, \fItime_starttransfer\fR, \fIssl_verify_result\fR, and
\fB%header{\fIName\fB}\fR. Phase timers are reported on HTTP/1.1 transfers.
.SS Connection and protocol
.TP
.BR \-4 ", " \-\-ipv4 ", " \-6 ", " \-\-ipv6
Force IPv4 or IPv6.
.TP
.BI \-x " proxy" "\fR, \fB\-\-proxy " proxy
Route through a proxy. Schemes: \fIhttp\fR, \fIhttps\fR, \fIsocks4\fR,
\fIsocks4a\fR, \fIsocks5\fR, \fIsocks5h\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-resolve " host:port:addr"
Provide a static address for \fIhost:port\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-connect\-to " spec"
Dial a different host:port while keeping the original \fIHost:\fR/SNI.
.TP
.BR \-\-unix\-socket " <path>"
Connect through a Unix\-domain socket (Unix only).
.TP
.BR \-\-disable\-epsv
For FTP, skip EPSV and use PASV directly.
.TP
.BR \-\-http2 ", " \-\-http1.1 ", " \-\-http3 ", " \-\-http3\-only
Select the HTTP version.
.TP
.BI \-\-retry " n"
Retry a failed transfer up to \fIn\fR times (with \fB\-\-retry\-delay\fR,
\fB\-\-retry\-max\-time\fR, \fB\-\-retry\-connrefused\fR,
\fB\-\-retry\-all\-errors\fR).
.TP
.BR \-Z ", " \-\-parallel
Run this invocation's transfers concurrently (\fB\-\-parallel\-max\fR caps them).
.SH EXIT STATUS
rsurl uses curl's exit codes. The common ones:
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Unsupported protocol.
.TP
.B 2
Failed to initialize / option error.
.TP
.B 3
URL malformed.
.TP
.B 6
Could not resolve host.
.TP
.B 7
Failed to connect.
.TP
.B 8
Weird server reply.
.TP
.B 22
HTTP page not retrieved (\fB\-f\fR with a >= 400 status).
.TP
.B 23
Write error.
.TP
.B 28
Operation timed out (includes \fB\-y\fR/\fB\-Y\fR low\-speed abort).
.TP
.B 47
Too many redirects.
.TP
.B 63
Maximum file size exceeded.
.SH EXAMPLES
Fetch a page:
.PP
.RS
.nf
rsurl https://example.com/
.fi
.RE
.PP
POST JSON and print the status and timing:
.PP
.RS
.nf
rsurl --json '{"a":1}' -w '%{http_code} %{time_total}\\n' https://api.example.com/
.fi
.RE
.PP
Download through a SOCKS5 proxy, resumable name, deleting partials on failure:
.PP
.RS
.nf
rsurl -x socks5h://127.0.0.1:1080 --remove-on-error -O https://example.com/file.bin
.fi
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR curl (1).
Run
.B rsurl --help
for the complete, build\-specific option list.
